# 1.1.3 The Economic Problem

## Resource Scarcity

The world has a **finite** amount of resources.

- We have a limited amount of things like land, water, oil, food, etc.

This means that [economic agents](../Keywords/EconomicAgent.md) can only obtain a limited amount of resources at any moment in time.

**For example**:

- A family cannot have everything that it wants.
- A government might want to build new hospitals, but the lack of finances prevents it from doing so.
- A firm may want to build a factory, but might not have the resources to build it.

!!! note "Keyword"

    **Economic good** - a scarce resource

## Infinite Wants, but Finite Needs

People actually have a **limited** number of **needs** that require to be satisfied if they are to survive as human beings.

### What are basic human needs?

- Food
- Water
- Shelter
- Clothing

You can likely thing of just a few more things that humans cannot survive without (an iPhone is not one!) - the point I am trying to make is that this list is ***finite***.

### Human Wants

Human wants on the other hand, as opposed to human needs, are completely ***infinite***.

There will **always** be something new that people may want.

**For example**:

- My economics teacher would like a house that doesn't fall apart every 2 minutes.
- A family may want a bigger car.
- An adult may want a higher salary.
- A student may want more friendships.

## The Basic Economic Problem (BEP)

To summarise: we have scarce resources, finite needs, but infinite wants which inherently we want to be satisfied.

[Economic agents](../Keywords/EconomicAgent.md) need to make rational choices.

Limited resources have to be allocated between **competing uses**.

**Every single choice** includes a range of alternatives. For example, should the government spend £10B on nuclear weapons, or giving the elderly greater care?

A rational economic agent makes the choice regrded as best, however **all other choices will be foregone**

## Opportunity Cost

Therefore we arrive at [opportunity cost](../Keywords/OpportunityCost.md), which is the **value of the next best alternative foregone** when a decision is made.

!!! warning "FREE goods do not have ANY opportunity cost."

For example, the opportunity cost for a government of a new warship might be the loss of three new hospitals. The opportunity cost here is the three new hospitals that could have been built.

## Economies

The mere existence of this basic economic problem lends credence to the creation of an [economy](../Keywords/Economy.md) - something that tries to solve the BEP.

You will learn more about the different *types* of economies in [1.1.6](./1.1.6-EconomyTypes.md).
