# 1.1.4 Production Possibility Frontiers (PPF)

A Production Possibility Frontier (PPF) shows the **maximum** output combinations of two goods or services that an [economy](../Keywords/Economy.md) can achieve when all resources are ***fully and efficiently*** employed.

PPF diagrams are especially important in their role of highlighting opportunity cost.

> It is important because it shows what *must* be given up when choosing one option over another, helping economic agents allocate scarce resources more efficiently.
>
> [1.1.3 The Economic Problem: Opportunity Cost](./1.1.3-BEP.md#opportunity-cost)

<!-- TODO: diagrams -->

- A **movement along** a PPF curve simply means a different opportunity cost as you decide to choose one thing over another.

- An entire **shift** of a PPF curve inwards means that an economy has shrunk, whereas an outwards shift means an economy has grown.

- A movement ***below*** the PPF curve means that the economy is the exact same size, however it is not operating at its maximum potential (underperforming).

## Capital and Consumer Goods

A [capital good](../Keywords/CapitalGood.md) is a good used for future production by manufacturers. This can be used as input in the production of consumer goods. It can be used to generate final products.

A [consumer good](../Keywords/ConsumerGood.md) is a good that is used for final consumption by users. No further processing is required, as it is the **final product**.

## Drawing PPF diagrams

TODO

Y axis is capital goods

X axis is consumer goods

!!! warning "PPF Diagrams must have an opportunity cost - examiners are picky!"
